A periodic boundary wave becomes smaller and later as it travels through an aquifer.
Classical amplitude and phase inversions can yield two different diffusivities from that same wave.
Lagging Theory represents causal field-scale memory, not a rigid time shift.
Present Darcy flux is assembled from a weighted history of hydraulic gradients.
Two response times distinguish flux adjustment from head equilibration.
Mass conservation combines with the memory law to yield a lagging groundwater-flow equation.
Under harmonic forcing, the decaying branch separates attenuation from a positive phase-lag gradient.
Their ratio maps when amplitude- and phase-derived diffusivities disagree.
Field transfer functions provide observed amplitude ratios and phase shifts at each frequency.
One parameter set fits both signatures at Tuolumne Meadows and the Meghna River.
AIC tests whether the improved fit justifies the two added lag parameters.
Measurement error generates five thousand plausible amplitude-phase data sets.
Each realization is refitted within bounded parameter space.
Interquartile filtering removes aberrant refits before uncertainty is summarized.
Posterior means and one-standard-deviation widths describe the retained parameter ensemble.
A finite-difference solution independently checks the analytical amplitude and phase response.
Morris sensitivity shows how information changes with frequency, lag ratio, and observation distance.
The same causal law resolves two different field-scale lag regimes without claiming a unique microscopic mechanism.